THERE IS A sudden silence and then everything is
the same. An empty house is never silent for long
and a house is never empty because we are here.
There is a sudden silence and then everything is
the same. Nothing is ever exactly the same, but it
goes back to how it was. The staircase creaks and
relaxes, the air slows and stills in rooms.
The buddleia in the attic is growing. We
dream, as we have always dreamt, of doors and
windows under water, of walls under water. We
try not to dwell on these dreams.
Dust drifts across the room and settles on
skirting and curtain rails. We can see it, every
single piece, as it piles up and no one brushes it
away. Dust is static and lazy; it lands on the first
thing it sees. It fills the house bit by bit and no one
brushes it away. It is not our job to brush it away.
*
This one left suddenly in the night. She sat up
quickly in bed, swung her legs on to the floor and
walked down the stairs. She stretched out her arms
but there was no one else there. She talked to
someone that we couldn’t see. ‘There you are,’
she said. ‘You didn’t take your boots off. Will I
need a coat?’ She went out the front door and she
left it open.
Things we glimpse out of the front door:
Other rooms.
Other houses.
One huge space like a silent kitchen, with
small lights on and one crescent of light, as if
someone had left the fridge door open.
It is rude to leave suddenly, without any notice.
She didn’t give us any notice. There weren’t any
boxes. She didn’t take any of her things away.
Didn’t she like it here? She left all her things
behind. What does she expect us to do with it all?
There is nothing that we can do with it, except
count it, except look carefully through it, and we
have done that already.
We back away, us, the house, towards
keyholes and gaps. Now there is the house and
there are the other things. We have retreated.
They have become left-behind things. They have
become awkward and extra, things that don’t
belong. It is inevitable.
*
86 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 87
Now we notice what we didn’t notice before: that
the paint is actually a strange blue, a cold blue, a
blue that wasn’t the right decision. We don’t want
that blue any more. We pick at it and bits fall on
to the carpet. We notice how thin the carpet is
getting. We notice how the clocks make the walls
sound hollow. We don’t like the walls to sound
hollow so we stop the hands on one or two clocks,
but only on one or two, and maybe we loosen the
battery in the back of another.
Sometimes a light shines through the window and
it looks as if someone has turned on a light
downstairs. Sometimes a voice calls through the
house, we feel some weight on the stairs; or a coat,
a dress left hanging in a cupboard seems rounder,
body-shaped, like there is someone inside it.
There is a flash on a door handle as if a hand were
reaching out to open it, but there is no hand. We
are the only ones left.
Things we miss about the one who left suddenly
in the night:
Her laugh, which was as loud and sudden as
the gas flame igniting in the boiler.
The kettle’s click and whoosh and teaspoons
tapping like rain against the windows.
Her television with all its bright colours and
its other houses.
The way she jumped when the doorbell
rang.
The way we had to make sure the walls
caught her when she stumbled.
That smokiness brews up and gets into the
curtains. We don’t know where it comes from.
There is a spider’s web behind a door handle and
one under a light switch. We like spiders; they are
quiet and make good use of the space.
Leaves come in under the door and we pick them
up by their stalks and let them out through the
letterbox.
Somebody comes and turns off the fridge and the
freezer and the boiler. Perhaps we have seen her
before. We are not good with faces. For a
moment, we think that the woman who left in the
night has come back. This new person watches as
the freezer shudders, then starts to drop pieces of
ice. She stands there, watching. She doesn’t do
anything except watch as the ice drops and melts
on the floor.
Now that there is no noise from the fridge
and the freezer and the boiler, we can hear other
things. We can hear the pictures beginning to tilt
off centre.
The telephone has been left plugged in and
sometimes it rings. Sometimes we hear a familiar
voice, always saying the same thing: ‘I’m not here
88 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 89
at the moment. Please leave a message and I’ll get
back to you.’ It is strange, hearing that voice again,
and we look around, half expecting to see
someone. At least, we think the voice is familiar –
we are not good with voices. It is easy for us to
forget.
Sometimes we listen to the messages but we
do not understand them.
‘Hello, I thought I’d ring for a quick catchup.
It’s been a long time. Sorry it’s been so long.
How is everything?’
‘The book you ordered is now ready to be
picked up.’
‘Is this the right number? Do you still live
here?’
The shoes are packed into boxes and the boxes are
stacked up like bricks. The mirrors are taken down
and the walls are just walls again, which is a relief.
There is always somebody who sorts through
the left-behind things and turns off the boiler. The
woman’s footsteps are light and slow. She stares
out of the window. She talks on the phone. She
puts on one of the jumpers from the wardrobe and
wears it all the time, even when she’s asleep. It is
too small for her. Once, she drops a glass as she is
packing, and she looks down at the pieces and
then drops the rest, glass by glass, which is
probably the clumsiest thing we have ever seen.
She takes the cushions off the sofa and moves
it away from the wall. There is something in the
empty space. There are small round balls, made
out of butter, covered in dust and hair. The
woman who left in the night used to cover them
in sugar and make anyone who came over eat
them. We didn’t know that most people dropped
them behind the sofa. We didn’t know they were
there. They are covered in dust and hair. The
woman with light, slow footsteps puts her hand
over her mouth and stares down at the butterballs.
We didn’t know they were there. It is not our job
to clear things away. They are the only thing we
have ever missed.
The house is bare. People come and go, mostly in
pairs.
We didn’t know those butterballs were there.
They are the only thing we have ever missed.
‘Would this be our bedroom? I’m not sure if I see
this as our bedroom,’ they say. They say, ‘What do
you think?’ They look at their reflections in the
windows and they look faint and lost. They keep
to the edges of the rooms. They sit on the edge of
the bath and look down into the plughole. They
investigate the pale grey fingerprints on a wall.
They lean backwards and measure out invisible
objects with their arms.
They are always drawn to the attic. We don’t
know why.
*
90 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 91
Things left behind in the attic:
A rocking horse with a missing eye.
A plastic skull.
A suitcase stuffed full of receipts and discount
vouchers.
A roll of carpet.
A cricket bat and a deflated football.
Four nails and six drawing pins.
A bunch of dry white flowers.
The attic is a strange place. There are gaps and
spaces that lead outside. There are silverfish and
seeds and pollen and old cooking smells. Buddleia
is growing through the wall. There are things that
people have hoarded and left behind.
Once, somebody’s legs went through the
attic floor because they weren’t careful. They
didn’t step in the right places. Just their legs
dangling and us wringing our hands and watching.
Plaster everywhere. It is our job to protect the
house. Why do they always want to go into the
attic? We don’t know why.
The buddleia shrivels and dries to husks. The cold
enters the house and so does someone new. The
boiler is switched on and there are boxes. He
moves them in himself, without any help. Most of
the boxes are left in the second bedroom and they
are not unpacked. There are no proper beds. He
unrolls a mat and sleeps on it. He stays up late,
staring at the television or at the computer. The
room flickers blue and green. He goes to the
fridge, to the sofa, to the bathroom, and on his
way between rooms he knocks into the walls with
his shoulders.
We dream, and in our dream there is a sudden
rush of water. Doors and windows soak and split.
They lift away from their frames and disappear.
Lampshades and clocks float past.
Two children come. The man makes them food
and puts it on their plates in the shape of a face. He
hadn’t turned the oven on before they arrived.
The boy looks pleased with his food but the girl
scowls and picks at the eyes. The table is too small
for three people so they keep knocking knees and
elbows. ‘What do you want to do?’ the man asks
them. He isn’t eating anything. They shrug. ‘Is
there a cat here? You said you would get a cat.’
‘I haven’t got a cat yet,’ he says.
‘You said you would get one,’ they tell him.
They look around at the bare house.
We have seen cats before. They stare at us
and bristle. We don’t like them. We have seen
children before. They move around so quickly
that we can’t keep track of which room they are
in. These children are different. They don’t move
quickly; they kick at the edges of things. They
don’t seem interested in the house. They trail after
each other and when they sit, they fall back with
all of their weight so that the sofa bumps into the
92 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits
wall.
*
Now and again, when the children aren’t there, a
woman comes over to stay. We don’t know if we
recognise her. We aren’t very good with faces.
Sometimes, when she goes to the bathroom, she
turns up the television first, but we don’t know
why she would do this. We are probably the only
ones who notice. When she can’t find her watch,
we find it for her, and put it in the pocket of her
coat, but then she shouts that she has already
looked in the pocket of her coat. We were only
trying to help. It is not our job to find things.
They step on each other’s feet in the kitchen.
They move their chairs closer together, slowly,
during dinner.
‘What are you thinking about?’ she asks him,
smiling, leaning close.
He looks at his fork. ‘The Spanish
Revolution,’ he says.
‘OK,’ she says. ‘OK.’
They raise their forks and lower them in
unison.
Number of tiles on the roof: 874. There were 876
but two disappeared and no one has replaced
them.
Leaves come in under the door and we post them
out through the letterbox.
93
Two new ones. They keep close together. There
is only ever one light on because they are always
in the same room. They don’t have any real
furniture; they have furniture that doesn’t look
solid. You can fold it. We have never seen folding
furniture. There’s no fridge yet, only a gap where
the fridge should be. They keep their milk in a
saucepan of cold water. We are not sure how well
they will look after the house. Nothing they have
looks solid.
On their first night, they drink a lot and then
dance around the bare room without music. They
are lighter than the others – when they walk the
boards barely creak. They use more of the space,
too, flinging themselves into every corner of the
room. They sit first in one place and then another.
They are moving all the time. They are touching
all the time: if one leaves the room the other one
follows soon after. They leave the bathroom door
open and their dinner plates unwashed.
The windows are huge and black without
curtains.
They have put up a shelf and they have done it
badly. It is going to fall off. We know it is going
to fall off. We can feel the screws loosening
millimetre by millimetre. We can feel the shelf
slipping. We knock off a book, then another
book, to try to make them notice. They don’t
notice. The man picks up one of the books and
reads out loud from it. ‘Listen to this,’ he says. We
94 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 95
listen. The woman listens.
We don’t like them very much. They look
after each other more than they look after the
house.
There is a night when, as if from nowhere, bright
lights and flashes fill the house. We can smell
smoke. Whenever this happens we think that
perhaps it is the end of the house, but it is never
the end of the house. They watch the flashes, their
noses pressed up to the glass. They write their
names in their own breath and their names stay
embedded in it. We can see all the names that
have been drawn on the windows, looped and
layered over each other. We don’t watch the
flashes. We prefer to hide from them with our
hands over our ears, waiting for them to stop.
They get a piano and put it in the empty room.
He plays and she stands behind him with her eyes
closed. The music spreads through the house like
hot-water pipes. We have never heard noises like
it.
They shower together before leaving in the
mornings, slipping their bodies around each other
in the water. It is like only one person lives here.
Their dips in the sofa are just one big dip in the
middle. They live with only one light on, in the
one room they are both in. We straighten their
shower curtain to stop it getting mouldy. We
shouldn’t have to do such things.
*
The shelf falls. It makes us jump, even though we
knew it would happen.
‘How’s the book?’ he calls through from the
kitchen where he is doing the washing-up.
She is reading, her feet curled up under her.
‘Hmm? I already got milk,’ she says, turning a
page. ‘I already got milk.’
He fumbles with a wet plate and water
sloshes down his knees.
The shower switches on. It switches off. The man
gets out, and after a pause, the woman gets in. The
shower switches on and off again. This is much
better. It allows the humid air to cool and
disappear. This is much better. Maybe finally they
are learning to look after the house.
They tread carefully and slowly – there is no
jumping or dancing. They buy solid furniture.
The lights are switched off earlier than usual and
the television is on almost all of the time. They
don’t come back as early as they used to – they
come home separately and later, sometimes
covered in tinsel and glitter. They bring a tree into
the house and we notice every needle that drops.
Other people come and they fold out a spare bed.
They all sit together and look at the house. They
96 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 97
have never paid this much attention. One of the
new people is a curtain-straightener, a cushionplumper.
She insists on doing the dishes then
purses her lips every time someone carries in
another plate. When a bird crashes into the
window she doesn’t jump. She refolds the towels.
‘The shelves you put up aren’t straight,’ she tells
the man. She straightens out the shower curtain so
it doesn’t go mouldy. We like her very much and
are sad when she leaves.
We have seen this before. All day, the woman has
been pacing between the bathroom and the
bedroom. Her steps are slow and heavy. She
flushes the toilet and the pipes sing and hiss. Then
she walks back into the bedroom, stands still in the
doorway and then lowers herself on to the edge of
the bed. Then she gets up again and paces. Then
she lies down quietly on the bed. She is already
carrying herself differently. We have seen this
before.
The man starts coming downstairs in the night. He
opens the fridge door and watches the light spill
out on to his bare feet. Sometimes, he pulls open
the front door and stands on the mat. The cold air
rushes into the house. We shiver and get
impatient. Why doesn’t he close the door? He
stands like that for a long time, until something
makes him sigh and shut the door and go back
upstairs.
*
The piano has disappeared. They have replaced it
with a small bed and other noises and mess and
lights clicking on and off, endlessly.
The boy is in the attic again. He is always in the
attic now that he can walk up the stairs by himself.
He is a small boy and he doesn’t weigh very much.
We know this because he fits easily through the
hatch and he doesn’t make the floor creak as if his
legs will go through the ceiling. We don’t have to
worry about him going through the ceiling. He
likes to be in empty rooms. He likes gaps and small
spaces. Once, he hid (we knew where he was) and
nobody could find him. A lot of people came to
look. We knew where he was all along – inside
the rolled-up carpet, for hours.
He has a tiny bird in a box. Three times a day he
comes into the attic and leans over it. He puts little
things in there. When he leaves, he pulls the
suitcase in front of the box. ‘Marty, Marty, Marty,’
he sings to it. ‘Marty, Marty, Marty.’ This is what
we have learnt from children bringing animals
inside the house in boxes: never name them, never
ever name them.
He stares at the box for a long time. Then he
closes the lid and takes it away.
98 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 99
*
Conversations the boy has with himself, or with
someone we can’t see:
Do birds sleep while they are flying?
I am a ghost and no one can see me unless I
want them to.
If everybody else disappeared, would it be
boring?
He also sings, whistles, hisses, burps and clicks. He
is like a miniature house.
Warm light comes through the windows and lies
in slabs on the floor.
The buddleia is growing back. The woman comes
up to the attic and tells the boy to go downstairs.
She hasn’t been in the attic for a long time. When
the boy has gone, she does the strangest thing. She
gets on to the rocking horse and she doesn’t fall
through the ceiling.
Brick by brick by brick, more houses are being
built somewhere near by. When do we arrive in
them? We don’t know. Were we already there
and the house was built around us? We don’t
know. We don’t exist without bricks and slate and
glass, and bricks and slate and glass do not exist
without us. There is no need to think about it any
further, but sometimes we like to think about it a
little bit.
The boy makes louder noises and puts more
weight on the floorboards and stairs: bang bang
bang. He doesn’t go up to the attic now. He stays
in his bedroom with the door and the curtains
closed.
One day he disappears, but nobody seems
worried this time. We can’t find him anywhere in
the house. No one else is looking. The house goes
back to the way it was. There is only a toothbrush
left behind in the pot, the banister he pulled off
hanging askew. The house gets its quietness back;
it gets its echoes and its quietness. Once or twice,
the man goes into the boy’s bedroom, talking, as
if he has forgotten that the boy isn’t there.
Things we miss about the boy who left:
The girl who came to visit him and wrote
her name behind a corner of the wallpaper
and then stuck it back down with spit. The
smell of the stuff he put on his hair –
sometimes we would take off the lid and
scoop out tiny little bits.
The house is bare. People come and go, mostly in
pairs.
When they come in the front door, they bring
with them one or two dry leaves, one or two
variations of light, and then the door closes and
the light is the same.
100 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 101
*
There are dark patches on the walls in the shape of
furniture and pictures that aren’t there any more.
The rocking horse nods forwards. The carpet is
thin and threadbare. Why doesn’t anyone replace
it? We would have replaced it by now. Light
moves up the stairs and then down the stairs, and
the house is dark again.
We miss lamps. We didn’t think we would.
We must have got used to them. At night, colours
ebb away as if they were never there. The corners
of the house darken and the hallway becomes
narrower. A door bangs open and closed but we
don’t know which door it is. It isn’t one of our
doors. We would never bang our doors like that.
It makes us nervous. We miss lamps. The
windows are huge and dark. The curtains are still
here, they usually take away the curtains. One
night, we decide to close them. It is not our job to
close them but we prefer it when they are closed.
At night, the house closes into itself and then it
stills and quietens and sleeps, and we dream of it
under water.
A strong breeze comes in under the door and
chases us around the house. It slams a loose
cupboard door. It furls and unfurls the corner of a
loose piece of wallpaper in a bedroom.
Underneath, someone had written something,
which they shouldn’t have done because that will
be hard to get off and we can’t remember who it
was.
It’s always the same – feet, feet, feet and dirt on
the carpet and now everything is being moved,
now everything is being changed. There is noise
and there is more noise and then there is the worst
thing: walls have been taken away and a door.
Now there is a gap where the door was and there
is a bigger room instead of two rooms and one less
room where the wall was before. We have been
rearranged. We hide behind the curtain poles and
under the loose tiles in the kitchen. Things have
been changed and things have been taken away.
We are not sure. We are not sure at all. We have
been rearranged. It is not what we expected to
happen. How can you take away a wall or a door
and not expect the whole house to fall down?
How hasn’t the whole house fallen down already?
We cower, covering our heads, waiting for it to
happen.
It hasn’t happened yet.
The man who did all the moving and all the
rearranging is staying here with a woman. They
have put in a new carpet. We actually liked the old
carpet. We actually miss the old carpet. They
don’t get up early and leave for most of the day
like most of the others. Instead, they stay in bed
for most of the morning and they eat breakfast in
102 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 103
bed and get crumbs everywhere. We are not sure
about them. But the woman sings in the shower
and her voice is deep and beautiful, almost like the
piano, and the man downstairs in the kitchen starts
humming the same tune and it seems like he hasn’t
noticed he is doing it. They stand under the crack
in the bathroom ceiling. They say it looks like an
ear; they say it looks like a heart. Why are they so
good at finding bits of themselves drawn on to the
house?
We miss the piano.
They talk about things they are going to do to the
house. They are going to get rid of the crack in
the bathroom. They are going to pull out the
buddleia. They are going to paint everything.
They are going to rearrange more walls. We don’t
want to listen, but we have to listen. It seems like
they have nothing to do except change the house.
We push against the wall when they’re drilling and
break their drills. We cling to the wallpaper. It is
our job to protect the house.
Now they have gone away and they have covered
everything with sheets. We like everything
covered with sheets. It keeps everything clean and
less dusty. It is not our job to dust.
Sometimes we think of the butterballs. They are
the only thing we have ever missed.
The new carpet is fraying. There is no stopping it.
The buddleia is growing back. There is no
stopping that, either.
Shadows that have passed across the keyhole:
twelve.
Number of silverfish in the attic:
seven, but one is not moving.
Dust that has floated past so far:
four million, seven hundred and forty-eight
pieces. There is a lot less dust than you’d
think when a house is empty.
Number of times we have banged into a wall,
forgetting that things have been changed:
too many to count.
We dream, and in our dreams, there are whole
houses under water, and streets and trees. It is cold
and quiet. Bubbles rise slowly out of chimneys.
They have come back. We think they are the
same people but we are not sure. We are not good
with faces. They seem much older. They walk
slowly up the stairs. They only take some of the
sheets off the furniture. The woman stays in bed,
not just late into the morning but for the whole
day. The man lowers her gently into water. He
sponges her back and washes her hair, keeping her
propped upright. He is silent, he is concentrating
hard. We, the house, hold our breath.
104 BBC National Short Story Award
Notes from the House Spirits 105
And we must have lost track of time because when
we release it, the house is bare again. The rocking
horse nods forwards. The air slows and stills in
rooms. Nothing is ever exactly the same, but it
goes back to how it was. We watch the door and
wait for somebody to come through it.